The Role of Global
Corporations in AI Ethics

The Role of Global Corporations in AI Ethics
• Recently collected data indicates that there is substantial citizen
support for the establishment of such organisational and procedural
mechanisms.
• An August 2024 Brookings survey found that: 55% of U.S.
respondents support hiring corporate ethicists; 67% of respondents
favor companies having a code of ethics; 66% believe that companies
should have an AI review board; 62% think there should be an AI
audit trail that shows how software designers (as well as the resulting
AI product) makes decisions; 65% favor the implementation of AI
training programmes for company staff; and 67% want companies to
have remediation procedures when AI inflicts harm or damage to
humans.

The Role of Global Corporations in AI Ethics
• The strong public support for these steps indicates people understand the
ethical risks posed by artificial intelligence and emerging technologies, as
well as the need for significant action by technology-based organisations.
Individuals want companies to have a sense of urgency when it comes to
taking meaningful action to protect them from rising inequity, bias, poor
accountability, inadequate privacy protection, and a lack of transparency.
• By embedding ethics into their infrastructure, corporations will be in a
better position to develop, refine, and revise normative frameworks that
can respond to new dynamics or emerging ethical challenges pertaining to
AI, and provide such a standard to AI technology developers in start-ups
with less capital and means. Such an effort of learning and tailoring ethics
to applied AI will ultimately benefit discussions on the technology and its
global governance.

SOCIAL
MEDIA
BY
THE
NUMBERS

The Role of Global Corporations in AI Ethics
• The world is seeing extraordinary advances in artificial intelligence
(AI). There are new applications in finance, defense, health care,
criminal justice, education, and other key industries. Algorithms are
improving fraud detection, health diagnoses, voice recognition
systems, as well as advertisement targeting in e-commerce and
political campaigns.
• Yet, at the same time, there is growing concern regarding the ethical
values embedded within AI and the extent to which algorithms
respect basic human rights. Ethicists worry about a lack of
transparency, poor accountability, rising inequity, and untethered bias
in automated tools.

The Role of Global Corporations in AI Ethics
• In this situation, it is of utmost importance for large global
corporations to take several steps to ensure that AI ethics are taken
seriously, and with a sense of urgency. The first step could be to
integrate organisational and procedural mechanisms that may help
cope with complex ethical dilemmas. Having clear processes and
avenues for deliberation will help prioritise and deal with particular
problems.

The Role of Global Corporations in AI Ethics
• Hiring ethicists: It is crucial for companies to embed ethicists within their staffs to help
them question whether potential AI applications are aligned with public interest and the
ethical needs of a globalising world. Giving these individuals a seat at the table will help
to ensure that ethics are taken seriously and appropriate deliberations take place when
ethical dilemmas arise, which is likely to happen on a regular basis.
• In addition, they can assist corporate leadership in creating an AI ethics culture and
supporting corporate social responsibility within their organisations. These ethicists
should make annual reports to their corporate boards outlining the issues they have
addressed during the preceding year and how they resolved ethical aspects of those
decisions.
• Having an AI code of ethics: Companies should have a formal code of ethics that lays out
their principles, processes, and methods for handling ethical issues during AI design and
development. Those codes should be made public on the firm’s websites so that
stakeholders and external parties can see how the company thinks about ethical issues
and the choices its leaders have made in dealing with emerging technologies

The Role of Global Corporations in AI Ethics

“AI goes beyond the development of traditional product lines with
narrow social implications. With its potential to distort basic human
values and rights, it is crucial to train people on how to think about AI
through all phases of its development”

The Role of Global Corporations in AI Ethics
Instituting AI review boards: Businesses should set up internal AI
review boards that evaluate product lines and are integrated into a
company’s decision-making. These boards should include a
representative cross-section of the firm’s stakeholders and be
consulted on AI-related decisions. Their portfolio should include
development of particular product lines, the procurement of
government contracts, and procedures used in developing AI products.

The Role of Global Corporations in AI Ethics
• Requiring AI audit trails: Companies should have AI audit trails that explain
how particular algorithms were put together or what kinds of choices were
made during the development process. This can provide some degree of
“after-the-fact” transparency and explainability to outside parties.
• Such tools would be especially relevant in cases that end up under litigation
and need to be elucidated to judges or juries in case of consumer harm or civil
suits. Since product liability law is likely to be the governing force in
adjudicating AI harm, it is necessary to have audit trails that provide both
external transparency and explainability.

The Role of Global Corporations in AI Ethics
• Implementing AI training programmes: Firms should have AI training
programmes that not only address the technical aspects of development, but the
ethical, legal, and societal ramifications. This would help software developers
understand that their products should not assume or embed their own individual
ethical values, but are part of a broader society that stretches around the globe
with a stake in AI development.
• AI goes beyond the development of traditional product lines with narrow social
implications. With its potential to distort basic human values and rights, it is
crucial to train people on how to think about AI through all phases of its
development.

The Role of Global Corporations in AI Ethics

• Another integral aspect to AI training programmes would be teaching
software designers about the perils of using poorly curated datasets
to train their algorithms, providing them with the tools to not only
identify bad training data, but also to provide them solutions and
access to wider datasets curated with the assistance of ethicists.

The Role of Global Corporations in AI Ethics
Providing a means of remediation for AI damages or harm: There
should be a means of remediation in cases where AI deployment
results in consumer damages or harm. This could be through legal
cases, arbitration, or some other negotiated process. This would allow
those hurt by AI to address the problems and rectify the situation.
Having clear procedures in place will help with this technology’s
unintended consequences.

The Role of Global Corporations in AI Ethics

Individuals want companies to have a sense of urgency when it comes
to taking meaningful action to protect them from rising inequity, bias,
poor accountability, inadequate privacy protection, and a lack of
transparency.

